Namespace | Common Domain Model
Skip to main content
Common Domain Model
7.0.0
Next
7.0.0
6.0.0
5.20.0
5.13.0
Docs
CDM Resources
Schemas
Get Involved
GitHub
Main Menu
Homepage
Overview of the FINOS CDM
The Common Domain Model
Product Model
Event Model
Legal Agreements
Process Model
Reference Data Model
Namespace
Serialization
Use Cases
eligible-collateral-representation
Standardized Schedule functions
Repurchase Transaction Representation in the CDM
Securities Lending
Pre-trade Processing
CDM Java Distribution Guidelines
Development Guidelines
Download Source Code
Common Domain Model Resources
CDM Videos
Get Involved
CDM Contribution Review Working Group
CDM Collateral Working Group
CDM Steering Working Group
CDM Tokenized Assets Working Group
CDM Physical Risk WG
CDM Technology Architecture Working Group
CDM Derivatives Working Group
Main Menu
Namespace
Version: 7.0.0
The CDM is partitioned into groups of namespaces. A namespace is an
abstract container created to hold a logical grouping of model
artefacts. The approach is designed to make it easier for users to
understand the model structure and adopt selected components. It also
aids the development cycle by insulating groups of components from
unrelated model changes that may occur. The partitioning is visible to
users in Rosetta Core by toggling the Namespace view in the left hand
panel, and in the generated code files.
Namespaces have many benefits:
Accelerated understanding of the model by allowing users to easily
see a high-level view of the model and easily find, select, and
study specific areas of interest
Faster and easier to find data types and functions for
referencing/use in new components
Allowing for partial adoption of areas of interest in the model
Smaller upgrades representing new versions limited to the name
spaces that are impacted
Model Artifacts
Model artifacts are organised into a directory hierarchy that is exposed
in the model editor.
Organising Principles
Namespaces are organised into a hierarchy, with layers going from in to
out. The hierarchy contains an intrinsic inheritance structure where
each layer has access to ("imports") the layer outside, and is designed
to be usable without any of its inner layers. Layers can contain several
namespaces ("siblings"), which can also refer to each other.
Example -- the base namespace
In the example above the layers of the "base" namespace can be observed.
There are four layers to the namespace. The outer layer "base" contains
one file and three namespaces. The next layer contains three siblings,
"datetime", "math", and "staticdata". A third and fourth layer is
contained within the "staticdata" namespace.
Hierarchy Structure
The namespace hierarchy in the CDM contains 7 components
Base -- contains basic concepts used across the model: date, time,
maths, static data
Event -- contains business event concepts: primitive, contract
state, and associated state transition function specifications
Legal Agreement -- contains generic documentation concepts: legal
agreement, contract, and credit support specifications
Observable -- contains observable concepts: market data, holiday
calendars, asset class specific specifications
Product -- contains generic product concepts: quantity, price,
economic terms and payout
Regulation -- contains regulation concepts: regulatory bodies,
corpus, report definitions and field rules
Each of these higher-level namespaces is further divided into
lower-level namespaces. The independent components in each namespace are
organised according to their core purpose but can be referenced from
anywhere in the model to allow all the components to work together for a
complete modelling solution. E.g. below is the 
product
 namespace:
When developing new CDM components, the positioning of those
components in the namespace hierarchy is critical
 as part of the
design (or potentially the re-organising of the hierarchy following the
new development), to ensure the CDM remains well organised.
Edit this page
Previous
Reference Data Model
Next
Serialization
CDM Working Groups
Contribution Review Working Group
Collateral Working Group
Derivatives Working Group
Technology Architecture Working Group
Phsyical Risk Working Group
Tokenized Assets Working Group
More CDM Working Groups
FINOS CDM Steering Working Group
ISLA CDM Working Group (Securities Lending)
ISLA CDM Trading Working Group (Securities Lending)
ISLA Document Digitisation Working Group (GMSLA)
Consume
CDM GitHub Repo
Releases
Schemas
What Is The CDM?
Frequently Asked Questions
CDM Java Distribution Guidelines
Download Source Code
CDM Launch Press Release
FINOS
FINOS Website
FINOS GitHub Org
About FINOS
Copyright © 2026 Common Domain Model - FINOS