Business Model | ISO20022

      Skip to main content
    
ISO 20022
ISO 20022
Universal financial industry message scheme

              About ISO 20022
            

      About ISO 20022
    

      ISO 20022 is a multi part International Standard prepared by ISO Technical Committee TC68 Financial Services
    

                          Governance
                        

                          APIs and ISO 20022
                        

                          Intellectual property rights
                        

              Catalogue
            

                          Business Domain Catalogues
                        

                                  Payments
                                

                                  Securities
                                

                                  Trade Finance
                                

                                  Cards
                                

                                  FX
                                

                          API Resources
                        

                          Additional Content for the Messages
                        

                                  Business application header (BAH)
                                

                                  Business file envelope
                                

                                  Business message envelope
                                

                                  Data Source Scheme
                                

                                  External Code Sets
                                

                                  ISO 20022 Real-Time Payments Group
                                

                                  Supplementary Data Extension
                                

                                  Variants
                                

                          Message archive
                        

              ISO20022 repository
            

      ISO 20022 Repository
    

      The ISO 20022 Repository consists of two major parts:


	the Data Dictionary
	the Business Process Catalogue
    

                          ISO 20022 Repository Online Search
                        

                          Download the e-Repository
                        

                          Business Model
                        

              Development
            

                          List of Submissions
                        

                                  Catalogue of Business Justifications for message development
                                

                                  Catalogue of Business Justifications for API resource development
                                

                                  Catalogue of Business Justifications for Supplementary Data Extension development
                                

                                  Catalogue of Business Justifications for variants development
                                

              Maintenance
            

                          Catalogue of Change Requests
                        

                                  Catalogue of message definitions change requests
                                

                                  Catalogue of API Resources change requests
                                

                                  Catalogue of change requests related to external code sets
                                

                                  Catalogue of change requests related to data sources schemes
                                

                                  Catalogue of change requests related to Supplementary Data
                                

                                  Catalogue of change requests related to the business model
                                

              eRequests
            

              FAQ & Search
            

                          FAQ
                        

                          Search
                        
Contact us

              Home
            
•

              ISO20022 repository
            
•

              Business Model
            

            Business Model
      
One of the most important ingredients of the ISO 20022 recipe

            Providing industry-agreed definitions of all financial services concepts
      
The Business Model is used to derive the data elements used in ISO 20022 message definitions (the ISO 20022 Message Concepts), thereby ensuring a common understanding across all messages used to support the various business domains. As such, it is one of the most important ingredients of the ISO 20022 recipe. Besides the ISO 20022 messaging, the Business Model offers a lot of potential for other applications.

            Benefits
      
standardized business concepts across all ISO 20022 message definitions 
clear definitions of industry business concepts and their relationships
strong foundation for communication between industry players
easy mapping with other standards
Business Transactions
Discover graphical representations of the business transactions supported by the Business Model
The Business Model includes completely defined business components and elements and the relationship among these components
Business Domains

      Common
          

      Securities
          

      Payments
          

      Trade Services
          

      Forex
          

      Cards and Related Services
          
Business Concepts
The Business Model is part of the ISO 20022 Data Dictionary which includes detailed information about every business concept

      Discover the available business concepts
          

            Updating the Business Model
      
The Business Model includes the business concepts that are used in the ISO 20022 messages. As such, it is usually enriched at the occasion of the development or maintenance of ISO 20022 messages. It is however possible to update and complement the ISO 20022 Business Model independently of the message development, provided that the updates can be made without impacting the existing ISO 20022 messages.
The business model update process includes the following steps

            1. The RA collects change requests from users
      
Show more
Show less
Actual or potential users of the ISO 20022 Business Model submit their requests for changes to the Business Model based on the specific 
Business Model change request
 to the 
Registration Authority (RA)
. Each Business Model change request must describe the scope of the change, the business concepts to be changed, the proposed name, definition, etc.
The RA checks each Business Model change request for completeness and conformance to the Business Model change request template. When the change request is valid (that is, conforming to the change request template), the RA returns a positive acknowledgement to the submitter and posts the change request in the 
Catalogue of change requests
.

            2. The RA performs the evaluation of the change requests
      
Show more
Show less
Change requests to the Business Model are evaluated by the RA, as well as the impact that the changes could have on existing ISO 20022 messages.
If the changes can be made without impacting the existing ISO 20022 messages, the RA updates the Business Model and prepares the documentation necessary for the submission of the updated model to the relevant 
SEG
 or the Cross-SEG Harmonisation team (CSH) if the changes related to 'common' business concepts that are used by several business domains.
If the changes require an update of existing ISO 20022 messages, the RA contacts the submitter with the request to prepare required message change requests as per the regular 
ISO 20022 maintenance process
.

            3. The SEG reviews the business model change request
      
Show more
Show less
The 
SEG
 or the CSH reviews the updated Business Model and approves the proposed implementation of each Business Model update.
The submitter is invited to participate in the evaluation to give any further clarification regarding the proposed updates.
The result of the review is an agreement regarding which changes will be implemented. The RA updates the Business Model change request with the SEG or CSH decision for each of the proposed changes, informs the submitter and updates the status of the change request in the 
Catalogue of change requests
.

            4. The RA publishes the new version of the ISO 20022 Business Model
      
Show more
Show less
The RA publishes the updates to the Business Model on the ISO 20022 website. This may include:
An update of the 
Business Model diagrams and definitions
An update of the 
e-Repository
An update of ISO 20022 Repository extract accessible through the Repository search.
ISO 20022

                  © Copyright ISO 20022
              

        Contact
      

        Privacy statement
      

        Cookie policy
      

        Terms of use
      