Proto Serialization Is Not Canonical | Protocol Buffers Documentation
Protocol Buffers Documentation
Protocol Buffers
Overview
Protoc Installation
News
Programming Guides
Language Guide (editions)
Language Guide (proto 2)
Language Guide (proto 3)
Proto Limits
Style Guide
Enum Behavior
Encoding
ProtoJSON Format
Techniques
Add-ons
Extension Declarations
Field Presence
Symbol Visibility
Proto Serialization Is Not Canonical
Deserializing Debug Proto Representations
Protobuf Editions
Overview
Feature Settings for Editions
Implementing Editions Support
Design Decisions
No Nullable Setters/Getters Support
We Prefer Opaque APIs
Implicit Presence
Insertion Points and Generic Services Regretted and Deprecated
Proto Best Practices
Avoid Cargo Culting
Proto Best Practices
1-1-1 Best Practice
Tutorials
C++
C#
Dart
Go
Java
Kotlin
Python
Reference Guides
C++
Generated Code Guide
String View APIs
Arena Allocation Guide
Abseil Support
C++ API
C#
Generated Code Guide
C# API
Dart
Generated Code
Dart API
Go
Generated Code Guide (Open)
Generated Code Guide (Opaque)
FAQ
Size Semantics
Go API
Opaque API Migration
Opaque API: Manual Migration
Opaque API FAQ
Java
Generated Code Guide
UTF-8 Validation in Java
Generated Proto Names
Java API
Kotlin
Kotlin
Generated Code Guide
Objective-C
Generated Code Guide
PHP
Generated Code Guide
PHP API
Python
Generated Code Guide
Python Comparison
Python API
Ruby
Generated Code Guide
Rust
Generated Code Guide
Redaction in Rust
Building Rust Protos
Design Decisions
Protocol Buffers
2023 Language Specification
Language Specification (Proto2 Syntax)
2024 Language Specification
Language Specification (Proto3)
Text Format Language Specification
MIME Types
Well-Known Types
Other Languages
Support
Version Support
Debugging
Migration Guide
Cross-Version Runtime Guarantee
Downloads
History
Forum
Search Results
 View page source
 Edit this page
 Create child page
 Create documentation issue
 Create project issue
Implications on Fingerprinting and Cryptographic Hashing
Deterministic is not Canonical
Inherent Barriers to Stable Serialization
Things Intentionally Left Undefined
Programming Guides
Proto Serialization Is Not Canonical
Proto Serialization Is Not Canonical
Explains how serialization works and why it is not canonical.
Many people want a serialized proto to canonically represent the contents of
that proto. Use cases include:
using a serialized proto as a key in a hash table
taking a fingerprint or checksum of a serialized proto
comparing serialized payloads as a way of checking message equality
Unfortunately, 
protobuf serialization is not (and cannot be) canonical
. There
are a few notable exceptions, such as MapReduce, but in general you should
generally think of proto serialization as unstable. This page explains why.
Implications on Fingerprinting and Cryptographic Hashing
While generic fingerprinting methods are attractive to many people, they have
the problem that it cannot be done in the general case (especially in the face
of unknown fields). Two different serialized representations will have identical
semantic meaning if they were known fields, but in the face of unknown fields
the parser or fingerprinter cannot know that they should be treated the same.
Since it cannot be correctly done in the general case, core Protobuf runtimes do
not offer such APIs.
Due to this issue, we recommend against generic fingerprinting on messages: any
such approach will tend to be correct for an arbitrary period of time until
unknown fields suddenly make the behavior incorrect despite no code change. Even
though it is possible for fingerprinting to be done correctly over messages that
have no unknown fields, code being guaranteed to never hit unknown fields for
all time going forward is a rare situation, and tends to have weak test coverage
despite being a common situation in our distributed systems.
Instead, when you need to fingerprint a message, we recommend writing out the
fingerprinting function yourself naming all fields, the same as you would for
any other struct. While this is more verbose, the behavior in the face of schema
evolution is much easier for any reader to realize, notice, and take
corresponding care.
If you do decide to make a generic fingerprinter, we recommend such generic
handling still be written and targeted for use as narrowly as possible. A narrow
use enables you to be responsible for the edge cases yourself, including how to
handle unknown fields, but also things that have no global obvious choice,
including string fields with malformed utf8 content, -0, whether NaNs should be
canonicalized, etc. By keeping the fingerprinter use-specific, it enables you to
adjust and move fast if you identify undesirable behavior in production, versus
a widely used library, which typically could not change such details without
breaking other users.
Deterministic is not Canonical
Deterministic serialization is not canonical. The serializer can generate
different output for many reasons, including but not limited to the following
variations:
The protobuf schema changes in any way.
The application being built changes in any way.
The binary is built with different flags (eg. opt vs. debug).
The protobuf library is updated.
This means that hashes of serialized protos are fragile and not stable across
time or space.
There are many reasons why the serialized output can change. The above list is
not exhaustive. Some of them are inherent difficulties in the problem space that
would make it inefficient or impossible to guarantee canonical serialization
even if we wanted to. Others are things we intentionally leave undefined to
allow for optimization opportunities.
Inherent Barriers to Stable Serialization
Protobuf objects preserve unknown fields to provide forward and backward
compatibility. The handling of unknown fields is a primary obstacle to canonical
serialization.
In the wire format, bytes fields and nested sub-messages use the same wire type.
This ambiguity makes it impossible to correctly canonicalize messages stored in
the unknown field set. Since the exact same contents may be either one, it is
impossible to know whether to treat it as a message and recurse down or not.
For efficiency, implementations typically serialize unknown fields after known
fields. Canonical serialization, however, would require interleaving unknown
fields with known fields according to field number. This would impose
significant efficiency and code size costs on all users, even those not
requiring this feature.
Things Intentionally Left Undefined
Even if canonical serialization was feasible (that is, if we could solve the
unknown field problem), we intentionally leave serialization order undefined to
allow for more optimization opportunities:
If we can prove a field is never used in a binary, we can remove it from the
schema completely and process it as an unknown field. This saves substantial
code size and CPU cycles.
There may be opportunities to optimize by serializing vectors of the same
field together, even though this would break field number order.
To leave room for optimizations like this, we want to intentionally scramble
field order in some configurations, so that applications do not inappropriately
depend on field order.
© 2026 Google LLC All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy
Hosted by GitHub Pages.
GitHub Privacy Statement