Proof-of-stake (PoS) | ethereum.org
Skip to main content
Overview
What is Ethereum?
Why Ethereum exists
Smart contracts
Test your knowledge
Start here
Choose your wallet
Get ETH
Explore apps
See all guides
Payments
Stablecoins
Prediction markets
See all use cases
Solo staking
Run a node
Pooled staking
Staking as a service
Layer 2 networks
Find an L2 network
Blockchain bridges
Builder's home
Builder tools & apps
Learn Ethereum development
Tutorials
Learn by coding
Overview
Foundational topics
Ethereum stack
UX/UI design fundamentals
Founders
Institution & enterprise
Privacy for institutions and technical solutions
Community hub
Events calendar
Online communities
Devcon
Where to start
Grants
About ethereum.org
Contributing to ethereum.org
Translation Program
ethereum.org collectibles
Brand assets
Ethereum Whitepaper
Reports
Governance
Overview
Improved security
Cheaper transactions
Better user experience
Privacy
EIPs - Ethereum improvement proposals
ERCs
Bug bounty
Trillion-dollar security
Energy consumption
History & founders
Technical history
Open research
Data & analytics tools
Ethereum Foundation
Change page
Overview
Foundational topics
Intro to Ethereum
Intro to Ether
Intro to dapps
Web2 vs Web3
Accounts
Transactions
Blocks
Ethereum virtual machine (EVM)
Opcodes
Gas
Nodes and clients
Run a node
Client diversity
Nodes as a service
Node architecture
Light clients
Archive nodes
Bootnodes
Networks
Consensus mechanisms
Proof-of-stake
Gasper
Weak subjectivity
Attestations
PoS rewards and penalties
PoS attack and defense
Keys
Withdrawal credentials
Proof-of-stake versus proof-of-work
Block proposal
Proof-of-stake FAQs
Proof-of-work
Mining
Mining algorithms
Dagger-Hashimoto
Ethash
Proof-of-authority
Ethereum stack
Intro to the stack
Smart contracts
Smart contract languages
Smart contract anatomy
Smart contracts libraries
Interacting with smart contracts
Testing smart contracts
Compiling smart contracts
Deploying smart contracts
Naming smart contracts
Verifying smart contracts
Upgrading smart contracts
Smart contract security
Smart contract formal verification
Composability
Development networks
Development frameworks
Ethereum client APIs
JavaScript APIs
Backend APIs
JSON-RPC
Authentication
Data and analytics
Block explorers
Storage
Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)
Programming languages
Dart
Delphi
.NET
Elixir
Golang
Java
JavaScript
Python
Ruby
Rust
Advanced
Bridges
Standards
Token standards
ERC-20: Fungible Tokens
ERC-721: NFTs
ERC-1155
Maximal extractable value (MEV)
Oracles
Scaling
Optimistic rollups
Zero-knowledge rollups
State channels
Sidechains
Plasma
Validium
Data availability
Blockchain data storage strategies
Networking layer
Network addresses
Portal Network
Data structures and encoding
Patricia Merkle Trie
Recursive-length prefix (RLP)
Simple serialize (SSZ)
Web3 secret storage definition
Design fundamentals
Intro to design and UX
Heuristics for Web3
Decentralized Exchange (DEX) design best practices
Proof-of-stake (PoS)
Copy .md
Copy .md
Edit page
 (opens in a new tab)
On this page
Proof-of-stake (PoS) underlies Ethereum's 
consensus mechanism
. Ethereum switched on its proof-of-stake mechanism in 2022 because it is more secure, less energy-intensive, and better for implementing new scaling solutions compared to the previous 
proof-of-work
 architecture.
Prerequisites
To better understand this page, we recommend you first read up on 
consensus mechanisms
.
What is proof-of-stake (PoS)?
Proof-of-stake is a way to prove that validators have put something of value into the network that can be destroyed if they act dishonestly. In 
Ethereum's
 proof-of-stake, validators explicitly stake capital in the form of ETH into a smart contract on Ethereum. The validator is then responsible for checking that new blocks propagated over the network are valid and occasionally creating and propagating new blocks themselves. If they try to defraud the network (for example by proposing multiple blocks when they ought to send one or sending conflicting attestations), some or all of their staked ETH can be destroyed.
Validators
To participate as a validator, a user must deposit 32 ETH into the deposit contract and run three separate pieces of software: an execution client, a consensus client, and a validator client. On depositing their ETH, the user joins an activation queue that limits the rate of new validators joining the network. Once activated, validators receive new blocks from peers on the Ethereum network. The transactions delivered in the block are re-executed to check that the proposed changes to Ethereum's state are valid, and the block signature is checked. The validator then sends a vote (called an attestation) in favor of that block across the network.
Whereas under proof-of-work, the timing of blocks is determined by the mining difficulty, in proof-of-stake, the tempo is fixed. Time in proof-of-stake Ethereum is divided into slots (12 seconds) and epochs (32 slots). One validator is randomly selected to be a block proposer in every slot. This validator is responsible for creating a new block and sending it out to other nodes on the network. Also in every slot, a committee of validators is randomly chosen, whose votes are used to determine the validity of the block being proposed. Dividing the validator set up into committees is important for keeping the network load manageable. Committees divide up the validator set so that every active validator attests in every epoch, but not in every slot.
How a Transaction Gets Executed in Ethereum PoS
The following provides an end-to-end explanation of how a transaction gets executed in Ethereum proof-of-stake.
A user creates and signs a 
transaction
 with their private key. This is usually handled by a wallet or a library such as 
ethers.js
 (opens in a new tab)
, 
web3js
 (opens in a new tab)
, 
web3py
 (opens in a new tab)
 etc but under the hood the user is making a request to a node using the Ethereum 
JSON-RPC API
. The user defines the amount of gas that they are prepared to pay as a tip to a validator to encourage them to include the transaction in a block. The 
tips
 get paid to the validator while the 
base fee
 gets burned.
The transaction is submitted to an Ethereum 
execution client
 which verifies its validity. This means ensuring that the sender has enough ETH to fulfill the transaction and they have signed it with the correct key.
If the transaction is valid, the execution client adds it to its local mempool (list of pending transactions) and also broadcasts it to other nodes over the execution layer gossip network. When other nodes hear about the transaction they add it to their local mempool too. Advanced users might refrain from broadcasting their transaction and instead forward it to specialized block builders such as 
Flashbots Auction
 (opens in a new tab)
. This allows them to organize the transactions in upcoming blocks for maximum profit (
MEV
).
One of the validator nodes on the network is the block proposer for the current slot, having previously been selected pseudo-randomly using RANDAO. This node is responsible for building and broadcasting the next block to be added to the Ethereum blockchain and updating the global state. The node is made up of three parts: an execution client, a consensus client and a validator client. The execution client bundles transactions from the local mempool into an "execution payload" and executes them locally to generate a state change. This information is passed to the consensus client where the execution payload is wrapped as part of a "beacon block" that also contains information about rewards, penalties, slashings, attestations etc. that enable the network to agree on the sequence of blocks at the head of the chain. The communication between the execution and consensus clients is described in more detail in 
Connecting the Consensus and Execution Clients
.
Other nodes receive the new beacon block on the consensus layer gossip network. They pass it to their execution client where the transactions are re-executed locally to ensure the proposed state change is valid. The validator client then attests that the block is valid and is the logical next block in their view of the chain (meaning it builds on the chain with the greatest weight of attestations as defined in the 
fork choice rules
). The block is added to the local database in each node that attests to it.
The transaction can be considered "finalized" if it has become part of a chain with a "supermajority link" between two checkpoints. Checkpoints occur at the start of each epoch and they exist to account for the fact that only a subset of active validators attest in each slot, but all active validators attest across each epoch. Therefore, it is only between epochs that a 'supermajority link' can be demonstrated (this is where 66% of the total staked ETH on the network agrees on two checkpoints).
More detail on finality can be found below.
Finality
A transaction has "finality" in distributed networks when it is part of a block that can't change without a large amount of ETH getting burned. On proof-of-stake Ethereum, this is managed using "checkpoint" blocks. The first block in each epoch is a checkpoint. Validators vote for pairs of checkpoints that it considers to be valid. If a pair of checkpoints attracts votes representing at least two-thirds of the total staked ETH, the checkpoints are upgraded. The more recent of the two (target) becomes "justified". The earlier of the two is already justified because it was the "target" in the previous epoch. Now it is upgraded to "finalized". This process of upgrading the checkpoints is handled by 
Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget (Casper-FFG)
 (opens in a new tab)
. Casper-FFG is a block finality tool for consensus. Once a block is finalized, it cannot be reverted or changed without a majority slashing of stakers, making it economically inviable.
To revert a finalized block, an attacker would commit to losing at least one-third of the total supply of staked ETH. The exact reason for this is explained in this 
Ethereum Foundation blog post
 (opens in a new tab)
. Since finality requires a two-thirds majority, an attacker could prevent the network from reaching finality by voting with one-third of the total stake. There is a mechanism to defend against this: the 
inactivity leak
 (opens in a new tab)
. This activates whenever the chain fails to finalize for more than four epochs. The inactivity leak bleeds away the staked ETH from validators voting against the majority, allowing the majority to regain a two-thirds majority and finalize the chain.
Crypto-economic security
Running a validator is a commitment. The validator is expected to maintain sufficient hardware and connectivity to participate in block validation and proposal. In return, the validator is paid in ETH (their staked balance increases). On the other hand, participating as a validator also opens new avenues for users to attack the network for personal gain or sabotage. To prevent this, validators miss out on ETH rewards if they fail to participate when called upon, and their existing stake can be destroyed if they behave dishonestly. Two primary behaviors can be considered dishonest: proposing multiple blocks in a single slot (equivocating) and submitting contradictory attestations.
The amount of ETH slashed depends on how many validators are also being slashed at around the same time. This is known as the 
"correlation penalty"
 (opens in a new tab)
, and it can be minor (less than 0.1% stake for a single validator slashed on their own) or can result in 100% of the validator's stake getting destroyed (mass slashing event). It is imposed halfway through a forced exit period that begins with an immediate penalty (1/4096 of the validator's effective balance, up to 0.5 ETH) on Day 1, the correlation penalty on Day 18, and finally, ejection from the network on Day 36. They receive minor attestation penalties every day because they are present on the network but not submitting votes. This all means a coordinated attack would be very costly for the attacker.
Fork choice
When the network performs optimally and honestly, there is only ever one new block at the head of the chain, and all validators attest to it. However, it is possible for validators to have different views of the head of the chain due to network latency or because a block proposer has equivocated. Therefore, consensus clients require an algorithm to decide which one to favor. The algorithm used in proof-of-stake Ethereum is called 
LMD-GHOST
 (opens in a new tab)
, and it works by identifying the fork that has the greatest weight of attestations in its history.
Proof-of-stake and security
The threat of a 
51% attack
 (opens in a new tab)
 still exists on proof-of-stake as it does on proof-of-work, but it's even riskier for the attackers. An attacker would need 51% of the staked ETH. They could then use their own attestations to ensure their preferred fork was the one with the most accumulated attestations. The 'weight' of accumulated attestations is what consensus clients use to determine the correct chain, so this attacker would be able to make their fork the canonical one. However, a strength of proof-of-stake over proof-of-work is that the community has flexibility in mounting a counter-attack. For example, the honest validators could decide to keep building on the minority chain and ignore the attacker's fork while encouraging apps, exchanges, and pools to do the same. They could also decide to forcibly remove the attacker from the network and destroy their staked ETH. These are strong economic defenses against a 51% attack.
Beyond 51% attacks, bad actors might also attempt other types of malicious activities, such as:
long-range attacks (although the finality gadget neutralizes this attack vector)
short range 'reorgs' (although proposer boosting and attestation deadlines mitigate this)
bouncing and balancing attacks (also mitigated by proposer boosting, and these attacks have anyway only been demonstrated under idealized network conditions)
avalanche attacks (neutralized by the fork choice algorithms rule of only considering the latest message)
Overall, proof-of-stake, as it is implemented on Ethereum, has been demonstrated to be more economically secure than proof-of-work.
Pros and cons
Pros
Cons
Staking makes it easier for individuals to participate in securing the network, promoting decentralization. validator node can be run on a normal laptop. Staking pools allow users to stake without having 32 ETH.
Proof-of-stake is younger and less battle-tested compared to proof-of-work
Staking is more decentralized. Economies of scale do not apply in the same way that they do for PoW mining.
Proof-of-stake is more complex to implement than proof-of-work
Proof-of-stake offers greater crypto-economic security than proof-of-work
Users need to run three pieces of software to participate in Ethereum's proof-of-stake.
Less issuance of new ETH is required to incentivize network participants
Comparison to proof-of-work
Ethereum originally used proof-of-work but switched to proof-of-stake in September 2022. PoS offers several advantages over PoW, such as:
better energy efficiency – there is no need to use lots of energy on proof-of-work computations
lower barriers to entry, reduced hardware requirements – there is no need for elite hardware to stand a chance of creating new blocks
reduced centralization risk – proof-of-stake should lead to more nodes securing the network
because of the low energy requirement less ETH issuance is required to incentivize participation
economic penalties for misbehavior make 51% style attacks more costly for an attacker compared to proof-of-work
the community can resort to social recovery of an honest chain if a 51% attack were to overcome the crypto-economic defenses.
Further reading
Proof of Stake FAQ
 (opens in a new tab)
Vitalik Buterin
What is Proof of Stake
 (opens in a new tab)
ConsenSys
What Proof of Stake Is And Why It Matters
 (opens in a new tab)
Vitalik Buterin
Why Proof of Stake (Nov 2020)
 (opens in a new tab)
Vitalik Buterin
Proof of Stake: How I Learned to Love Weak Subjectivity
 (opens in a new tab)
Vitalik Buterin
Proof-of-stake Ethereum attack and defense
 (opens in a new tab)
A Proof of Stake Design Philosophy
 (opens in a new tab)
Vitalik Buterin
Video: Vitalik Buterin explains proof-of-stake to Lex Fridman
 (opens in a new tab)
Related topics
Proof-of-work
Proof-of-authority
Test your Ethereum knowledge
Page last update: August 31, 2026
j
 (opens in a new tab)
P
 (opens in a new tab)
c
 (opens in a new tab)
+20
See contributors
Previous
Consensus mechanisms
Next
Gasper
Was this article helpful?
Yes
No
On this page
Prerequisites
What is proof-of-stake (PoS)?
Validators
How a Transaction Gets Executed in Ethereum PoS
Finality
Crypto-economic security
Fork choice
Proof-of-stake and security
Pros and cons
Comparison to proof-of-work
Further reading
Related topics
Website last updated: 
October 1, 2026
Go to top
ethereum.org
Learn
Learn Hub
What is Ethereum?
What is ether (ETH)?
Ethereum wallets
What is Web3?
Smart contracts
Gas fees
Run a node
Ethereum security and scam prevention
Quiz Hub
How people use Ethereum
Ethereum glossary
Use
Guides
Choose your wallet
Get ETH
Application explorer
Stablecoins
NFTs - Non-fungible tokens
DeFi - Decentralized finance
DAOs - Decentralized autonomous organizations
Decentralized identity
Stake ETH
Layer 2
Build
Builder's home
Tutorials
Documentation
Start building
Learn Ethereum development
Grants
Foundational topics
UX/UI design fundamentals
Enterprise - Mainnet Ethereum
 (opens in a new tab)
Founders
Participate
Community hub
Online communities
Ethereum events
Contributing to ethereum.org
Translation Program
Ethereum bug bounty program
Ethereum Foundation
Ethereum Foundation Blog
 (opens in a new tab)
Ecosystem Support Program
 (opens in a new tab)
Devcon
 (opens in a new tab)
Research
Ethereum Whitepaper
Ethereum roadmap
Improved security
Technical history of Ethereum
Open research
Ethereum Improvement Proposals
Ethereum governance
Reports
Trillion dollar security project
GitHub
 (opens in a new tab)
Farcaster
 (opens in a new tab)
X
 (opens in a new tab)
Discord
 (opens in a new tab)
About us
Ethereum brand assets
Code of conduct
Jobs
Privacy policy
Terms of use
Cookie policy
Press Contact
 (opens email client)